Today is July the 3, and for us humans
on Earth, today's the day that we're the
furthest away from the sun that we'll be
all year. So, why is it so warm? Where I
live, it's summertime, and we've just
gone through our first heat wave of the
year. And you'd think it would be cold
when you're far away from the sun and
warm when you're close to the sun on the
3rd of January, but it's the other way
round. This can all be explained by the
fact that Earth has a tilted axis like
my head right now in the summer. We're
tilted towards the sun, so we're getting
more heat from it. Just to give you some
concrete numbers, we're getting about 7%
less energy from the sun by being far
away now compared to January the 3rd
when we're closer. We get 7% more. But
the difference in tilt means tilting
towards the sun gives about 500% as much
energy as being tilted away. for here in
London. It obviously varies depending on
how high up or down in latitude you are.
And obviously everything's flipped for
the southern hemisphere because it's
their winter at the moment. So it does
kind of make sense for them. But it's
interesting this combination means that
in the northern hemisphere we have
slightly longer summers and slightly
shorter winters. Whereas in the southern
hemisphere it's the opposite way around.
They have slightly shorter summers and
slightly longer winters. So, in
conclusion, as they always say, nobody
cares how far away you are from the sun
if you've got a wonky axis.